Psalm 106-115.
The Book of Psalms.
King James Version.
Psalm 106.
Praise ye the LORD!
O give thanks unto the LORD!
For he is good, for his mercy endureth forever.
Who can utter the mighty acts of the LORD?
Who can show forth all his praise?
Blessed are they that keep judgment,
And he that doeth righteousness at all times.
Remember me, O LORD, with the favor that thou bearest unto thy people.
O visit me with thy salvation,
That I may see the good of thy chosen,
That I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation,
That I may glory with thine inheritance.
We have sinned with our fathers,
We have committed iniquity,
We have done wickedly.
Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt,
They remembered not the multitude of thy mercies,
But provoked him at the sea, even at the Red Sea.
Nevertheless, he saved them for his name's sake,
That he might make his mighty power to be known.
He rebuked the Red Sea also, and it was dried up,
So he led them through the depths, as through the wilderness.
And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them,
And redeemed them from the hand of the enemy,
And the waters covered their enemies.
There was not one of them left,
Then believed they his words, they sang his praise,
They soon forgot his works,
They waited not for his counsel,
But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness,
And tempted God in the desert,
And he gave them their request,
But sent leanness into their soul,
They envied Moses also in the camp,
And Aaron the saint of the Lord.
The earth opened, and swallowed up Dathan,
And covered the company of Abiram,
And a fire was kindled in their company,
The flame burned up the wicked.
They made a calf in Horeb,
And worshipped the molten image,
Thus they changed their glory,
Into the similitude of an ox that eateth grass,
They forgot God their Saviour,
Which had done great things in Egypt,
Wondrous works in the land of Ham,
And terrible things by the Red Sea.
Therefore he said that he would destroy them,
Had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach,
To turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them.
Yea, they despised the pleasant land,
They believed not his word,
But murmured in their tents,
And hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord.
Therefore he lifted up his hand against them,
To overthrow them in the wilderness,
To overthrow their seed also among the nations,
And to scatter them in the lands.
They joined themselves also unto Balpior,
And ate the sacrifices of the dead,
Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions,
And the plague break in upon them,
Then stood up Phineas, and executed judgment,
And so the plague was stayed,
And that was counted unto him for righteousness,
Unto all generations for evermore.
They angered him also at the waters of Strife,
So that it went ill with Moses for their sakes,
Because they provoked his spirit,
So that he spake unadvisedly with his lips.
They did not destroy the nations concerning whom the Lord commanded them,
But were mingled among the heathen,
And learned their works,
And they served their idols,
Which were a snare unto them,
Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils,
And shed innocent blood,
Even the blood of their sons and of their daughters,
Whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan,
And the land was polluted with blood,
Thus were they defiled with their own works,
And went a-whoring with their own inventions.
Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people,
In so much that he abhorred his own inheritance,
And he gave them into the hand of the heathen,
And they that hated them ruled over them,
Their enemies also oppressed them,
And they were brought into subjection under their hand.
Many times did he deliver them,
But they provoked him with their counsel,
And were brought low for their iniquity.
Nevertheless he regarded their affliction,
When he heard their cry,
And he remembered for them his covenant,
And repented according to the multitude of his mercies.
He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them captives.
Save us, O Lord our God,
And gather us from among the heathen,
To give thanks unto thy holy name,
And to triumph in thy praise.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
From everlasting to everlasting,
And let all the people say Amen,
Praise ye the Lord.
Psalm 107
O give thanks unto the Lord,
For he is good,
For his mercy endureth for ever.
Let the redeemed of the Lord say so,
Whom he hath redeemed from the hand of the enemy,
And gathered them out of the lands,
From the east,
And from the west,
From the north,
And from the south.
They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way,
They found no city to dwell in,
Hungry and thirsty,
Their soul fainted in them.
Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble,
And he delivered them out of their distresses.
And he led them forth by the right way,
That they might go to a city of habitation.
O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
And for his wonderful works to the children of men,
For he satisfieth the longing soul,
And filleth the hungry soul with goodness.
Such as sit in darkness,
And in the shadow of death,
Being bound in affliction and iron,
Because they rebelled against the words of God,
And condemned the council of the Most High.
Therefore he brought down their heart with labor,
They fell down,
And there was none to help.
Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble,
And he saved them out of their distresses.
He brought them out of darkness,
And the shadow of death,
And break their bands in sunder.
O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
And for his wonderful works to the children of men,
For he hath broken the gates of brass,
And cut the bars of iron and sunder.
Fools, because of their transgression,
And because of their iniquities, are afflicted,
Their soul abhorreth all manner of meat,
And they draw near unto the gates of death.
Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble,
And he saveth them out of their distresses.
He sent his word, and healed them,
And delivered them from their destructions.
O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
And for his wonderful works to the children of men,
And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving,
And declare his works with rejoicing.
They that go down to the sea in ships,
That do business in the great waters,
These see the works of the Lord,
And his wonders in the deep.
For he commandeth and raiseth the stormy wind,
Which lifteth up the waves thereof.
They mount up to the heaven.
They go down again to the depths,
Their soul is melted because of trouble.
They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man,
And are at their wit's end.
Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble,
And he bringeth them out of their distresses.
He maketh the storm a calm,
So that the waves thereof are still.
Then they are glad because they be quiet.
So he bringeth them unto their desired haven.
O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
And for his wonderful works to the children of men,
Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people,
And praise him in the assembly of the elders.
He turneth rivers into a wilderness,
And the water springs into dry ground,
A fruitful land into barrenness.
For the wickedness of them that dwell therein,
He turneth the wilderness into a standing water,
And dry ground into water springs.
And there he maketh the hungry to dwell,
That they may prepare a city for habitation,
And sow the fields and plant vineyards,
Which may yield fruits of increase.
He blesseth them also,
So that they are multiplied greatly,
And suffereth not their cattle to decrease.
Again they are minnished,
And brought low through oppression,
Affliction and sorrow.
He poureth contempt upon princes,
And causeth them to wander in the wilderness
Where there is no way.
Yet setteth he the poor on high from affliction,
And maketh him families like a flock.
The righteous shall see it and rejoice,
And all iniquity shall stop her mouth.
Whoso is wise and will observe these things,
Even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
Psalm 108
O God, my heart is fixed,
I will sing and give praise even with my glory.
Awake, sultry and harp,
I myself will awake early.
I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people,
And I will sing praises unto thee among the nations.
For thy mercy is great above the heavens,
And thy truth reacheth unto the clouds.
Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens,
And thy glory above all the earth,
That thy beloved may be delivered,
Save with thy right hand and answer me.
God hath spoken in his holiness,
I will rejoice, I will divide Shechem,
And meet out the valley of Sukkoth.
Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine,
Ephraim also is the strength of mine head,
Judah is my law-giver,
Moab is my wash-pot,
Over Edom will I cast out my shoe,
Over Philistia will I triumph.
Who will bring me into the strong city?
Who will lead me into Edom?
Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast us off,
And wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our hosts?
Give us help from trouble,
For vain is the help of man.
Through God we shall do valiantly,
For he it is that shall tread down our enemies.
Psalm 109
Hold not thy peace, O God, of my praise,
For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful
Are opened against me.
They have spoken against me with a lying tongue.
They compassed me about also with words of hatred,
And fought against me without a cause.
For my love they are my adversaries,
But I give myself unto prayer,
And they have rewarded me evil for good and hatred for my love.
Set thou a wicked man over him,
And let Satan stand at his right hand.
When he shall be judged let him be condemned,
And let his prayer become sin.
Let his days be few,
And let another take his office.
Let his children be fatherless,
And his wife a widow.
Let his children be continually vagabonds and beg.
Let them seek their bread also out of their desolate places.
Let the extortioner catch all that he hath,
And let the stranger spoil his labor.
Let there be none to extend mercy unto him,
Neither let there be any to favor his fatherless children.
Let his posterity be cut off,
And in the generation following let their name be blotted out.
Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the Lord,
And let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.
Let them be before the Lord continually,
That he may cut off the memory of them from the earth,
Because that he remembered not to show mercy,
But persecuted the poor and needy man,
That he might even slay the broken in heart.
As he loved cursing,
So let it come unto him.
As he delighted not in blessing,
So let it be far from him.
As he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment,
So let it come into his bowels like water,
And like oil into his bones.
Let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him,
And for a girdle wherewith he is girded continually.
Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the Lord,
And of them that speak evil against my soul.
But do thou for me, O God the Lord, for thy name's sake,
Because thy mercy is good, deliver thou me.
For I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.
I am gone like the shadow when it declineeth,
I am tossed up and down as the locust,
My knees are weak through fasting,
And my flesh faileth of fatness.
I became also a reproach unto them,
When they looked upon me they shaked their heads.
Help me, O Lord my God,
O save me according to thy mercy,
That they may know that this is thy hand,
That thou, Lord, hast done it.
Let them curse, but bless thou.
When they arise, let them be ashamed,
But let thy servant rejoice.
Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame,
And let them cover themselves with their own confusion as with a mantle.
I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth,
Yea, I will praise him among the multitude,
For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor,
To save him from those that condemn his soul.
Psalm 110
The Lord said unto my Lord,
Sit thou at my right hand,
Until I make thine enemies thy footstool,
The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion,
Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies,
Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power,
In the beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning,
Thou hast the dew of thy youth.
The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent,
Thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek.
The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath,
He shall judge among the heathen,
He shall fill the places with the dead bodies,
He shall wound the heads over many countries,
He shall drink of the brook in the way,
Therefore shall he lift up the head.
Psalm 111
Praise ye the Lord,
I will praise the Lord with my whole heart,
In the assembly of the upright, and in the congregation.
The works of the Lord are great,
Sought out of all them that have pleasure therein.
His work is honorable and glorious,
And his righteousness endureth for ever.
He hath made his wonderful works to be remembered.
The Lord is gracious and full of compassion,
He hath given meat unto them that fear him,
He will ever be mindful of his covenant,
He hath showed his people the power of his works,
That he may give them the heritage of the heathen.
The works of his hands are verity and judgment,
All his commandments are sure,
They stand fast for ever and ever,
And are done in truth and uprightness.
He sent redemption unto his people,
He hath commanded his covenant for ever,
Holy and reverend is his name.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,
A good understanding have all they that do his commandments,
His praise endureth for ever.
Psalm 112
Praise ye the Lord,
Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord,
That delighteth greatly in his commandments,
His seed shall be mighty upon earth,
The generation of the upright shall be blessed,
Wealth and riches shall be in his house,
And his righteousness endureth for ever.
Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness,
He is gracious and full of compassion and righteous,
A good man showeth favor and lendeth,
He will guide his affairs with discretion,
Surely he shall not be moved for ever,
The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance,
He shall not be afraid of evil tidings,
His heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord,
His heart is established,
He shall not be afraid until he see his desire upon his enemies,
He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor,
His righteousness endureth for ever,
His horn shall be exalted with honor,
The wicked shall see it and be grieved,
He shall gnash with his teeth and melt away,
The desire of the wicked shall perish.
Psalm 113
Praise ye the Lord, praise, O ye servants of the Lord,
Praise the name of the Lord!
Blessed be the name of the Lord,
From this time forth and for evermore,
From the rising of the sun unto the going down
Of the same the Lord's name is to be praised.
The Lord is high above all nations,
And his glory above the heavens,
Who is like unto the Lord our God,
Who dwelleth on high,
Who humbleth himself to behold the things
That are in heaven and in the earth,
He raiseth up the poor out of the dust,
And lifteth the needy out of the dung-hill,
That he may set him with princes,
Even with the princes of his people,
He maketh the barren woman to keep house,
And to be a joyful mother of children.
Praise ye the Lord!
Psalm 114
When Israel went out of Egypt,
The house of Jacob from a people of strange language,
Judah was his sanctuary,
And Israel his dominion,
The sea sawed and fled,
Jordan was driven back,
The mountains skipped like rams,
And the little hills like lambs.
What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou flettest,
Thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back,
Ye mountains that ye skipped like rams,
And ye little hills like lambs,
Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord,
At the presence of the God of Jacob,
Which turned the rock into a standing water,
The flint into a fountain of waters.
Psalm 115
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us,
But unto thy name give glory,
For thy mercy and for thy truth's sake.
Wherefore should the heathen say,
Where is now their God?
But our God is in the heavens,
He hath done whatsoever he hath pleased.
Their idols are silver and gold,
The work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but they speak not,
Eyes have they, but they see not,
They have ears, but they hear not,
Noses have they, but they smell not,
They have hands, but they handle not,
Feet have they, but they walk not,
Neither speak they through their throat.
They that make them are like unto them,
So is every one that trusteth in them.
O Israel, trust thou in the Lord,
He is their help and their shield.
O house of Aaron, trust in the Lord,
Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord,
He is their help and their shield.
The Lord hath been mindful of us,
He will bless us,
He will bless the house of Israel,
He will bless the house of Aaron.
He will bless them that fear the Lord,
Both small and great,
The Lord shall increase you more and more,
You and your children.
Ye are blessed of the Lord,
Which made heaven and earth,
The heaven, even the heavens are the Lord's,
But the earth hath he given to the children of men.
The dead praise not the Lord,
Neither any that go down into silence,
But we will bless the Lord,
From this time forth and for evermore.
Praise the Lord.